# `E.04.0` Traceability for High Energy Photon Dosimetry for Non-Intrusive Inspection Systems

## Objective

- Establish clear and definitive standards to measure the performance of cargo
inspection systems employing multi-energy high-energy X-ray photons to detect
the presence of explosive materials in large target cargo containers.

- Standardize measurement methodologies for detection rates for specific
quantities of explosive materials.

## Actions

- [ ] Establish standards for measuring the performance of imaging X-ray
systems for explosive detection in cargo security screening (such as those
developed for high energy imaging equipment through `ANSI-N45.46`).

## Requirements

- [ ] A minimum of 2 NIST person-years per year over the next three years.

- [ ] Access to linear accelerators capable of producing multi-energy
high-energy X-ray photons for development and verifications of detector
materials and explosive surrogates.

- [ ] Partnerships between NIST and DHS are essential in this area.

## Background

While standards exist for identifying and mitigating the threat posed by
explosives that may be hidden inside of small targets such as check and
carry-on baggage, significant standards development is required to assure the
detection of explosive threats potentially hidden inside of large targets such
as ISO cargo containers. Next generation baggage inspection systems will employ
multi-energy low-energy X-ray photons (100–180 KV) generated using traditional
X-ray tubes to discriminate explosive threat materials. Cargo inspection
systems require much higher energy photons (4–10 MeV) to penetrate large cargo
containers and multiple pulsed energies to effectively discriminate explosive
materials. These multi-energy, high-energy X-ray photons are generated by
bremsstrahlung conversion using electron accelerators which are capable of
producing multi-energy pulses of high-energy electrons that are then directed
onto high-Z targets creating bremsstrahlung photons proportional to the energy
of the electron beam. Next generation and current X-ray inspection systems use
density and/or atomic composition as primary indicators to discriminate
explosive threats from most benign materials. When both of these attributes are
known, they can provide a reasonable identifier of the presence of explosives.
The density of potential explosive threat materials inside of a object to be
inspected can be calculated based upon attenuated photon flux. However, density
alone has limited value because observations correspond to averages over
regions of space where a mix of low-, medium-, and high-density non-threat
materials may coexist. The effective atomic number ($Z_\text{eff}$) or the
weighted mean of the atomic numbers of the elements in a compound. A surrogate
material used in the performance standards for the next generation X-ray
scanners should possesses the same attenuation properties as its parent
compound over the photon energy region of interest. This can only be
accomplished with a compound whose density and $Z_\text{eff}$ are nearly
identical. As with density, measurements that average over a large region of
space utilizing poorly selected or created surrogates may dilute the explosive
signature with surrounding materials.

Low energy inspection systems are widely deployed with well-established
performance standards for multiple energy material discrimination of explosive
materials. While X-ray photon signatures required to determine the density and
$Z_\text{eff}$ of explosive materials can be confidently measured at low
energies, these signatures are relatively subtle and difficult to confidently
measure at the high energies required to penetrate large targets such as a
cargo container. New multi-energy, high-energy LINAC designs and detector
materials are being sought to enhance the material discrimination capability in
non-destructive imaging air, land and sea cargo inspection systems. The current
generation of LINACS have high pulse-to-pulse variability which affects the
ability to detect the subtle signature changes that occur when X-rays interact
with explosive materials at high photon energies. The needed next generation of
imaging interrogation LINACs must have minimal radiation leakage and high
pulse-to-pulse reproducibility (low variability in end point energy and
integrated pulse energy) to improve the detectability of explosive materials.
This next generation of LINACs needs to have high beam on to beam off ratios
with very little dark current for high fidelity measurements. Photon detectors
used in these high-energy active interrogation techniques are count-rate
limited, often relying on detectors that have fast recovery times and provide
poor or no energy resolution. Advancements in detector technologies must
facilitate higher count-rates. In addition to measuring precisely the quantity
of photons, these new detectors should improve on one or more traditional
detector parameters such as efficiency, energy resolution (or energy
threshold), size, cost, and photon/neutron discrimination. Clear and definitive
standards are required to measure the performance of cargo inspection systems
for the detection of explosives.
