# `D.06.1` Pollution prevention

## Objective

- Document the concomitant energy savings when using low-energy electron beams
to eliminate volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from inks, coatings and
adhesives.

## Actions

- [ ] Working with an industrial association, such as RadTech International
North America, and its members, some of whom use low-energy EB processing,
establish a program to conduct energy consumption studies on processes, thermal
and EB, which are being used to make the same or comparable products.
Co-funding for such a study could be obtained through the New York State Energy
Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) which is favorably disposed to
support low-energy EB processing. Such a study could be conducted through the
newly established UV/EB Technology Center at the State University of New York,
College of Environmental Science and Forestry, a center co-funded by NYSERDA.

## Requirements

- [ ] At least one full person-year of a process engineer is needed to define
the parameters of such a study, to locate the appropriate industrial facilities
to conduct such studies, to monitor energy consumption and to publish the
results.

## Background

There have been numerous research programs, many publications and but a very
few demonstration projects showing the efficacy of using electron beams to
eliminate air pollutants, such as sulfur and nitrous oxides, from fossil fuel
power plants and to eliminate biological hazards and toxic chemicals from
wastewater. However, by far, the greatest contribution of electron beam
processing to pollution prevention (P2) has been the adoption of low-energy
electron beams in the printing, converting and coating industries. By
eliminating VOCs through the use of EB curable inks, coatings and adhesive,
companies readily comply with the US Clean Air Act amendments of 1990. The
technology of using reactive diluents has enabled producers to use conventional
printing and coating processes, but to complement them with energy-efficient,
space saving self-shielded low-energy electron beams.

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and regional air quality
districts, such as the Air Quality Management District in the Los Angeles
county area, have acknowledge low energy EB processing as a pollution
prevention, point-of-source technique. This contrasts with the EB uses noted
above for stack gas and waster water treatment and of alternative technologies,
such as solvent recovery and recycling, which are considered “tail pipe”
technologies, systems used after the pollutant has been generated. EB
processing also eliminates some of these sources for greenhouse gases.

Low-energy electron beams are also very efficient in converting incoming line
power electricity into useful ionizing radiation, between 65% to 80% of
incoming power results in useful EB output. The Industry Working Group at the
US Department of Energy conference on “Accelerators for America’s Future” held
in Washington, DC, in October 2009, estimated that if just one industry, coil
coating, were to adopt EB processing, there would be sufficient energy savings
to reduce power demand equivalent to that of a mid-sized power generating
facility. Coil coating was selected as a market area of interest in that this
was one market segment for which the EPA had published volume usage of
coatings. While the US coil coating industry has not yet adopted EB processing,
it is being used in a full scale production facility in Europe. Relative to the
total market potential in printing and coatings, coil coating is a minor
fraction.

Comparative studies are needed to document the energy savings of using EB
processing versus historic uses of thermal drying and processing in diverse
industrial applications. With EB processing, one can easily measure input power
consumption in terms of kilowatt-hours. However, little is known about the
total power consumption, including energy transfer efficiency, for historic
systems of thermal curing and drying. Such data can be generated by astute
engineering studies.
